---
date: 2024-07-22
tags:
    - Doc
hubs:
    - "[[Parsing]]"
urls:
    - https://docs.python.org/3/howto/regex.html
---

# Regex 

Regular expressions is a tiny highly specialized programming language that is embedded in the "re" module in Python.
You use by precising a set or pattern of string thaht want to match. You can then ask if a string or a substring match this pattern,
or you can modify or split a string.

Regex patterns are compiled into series of bytescode wich are then executed by a matching engine.

## Simple patterns

### Matching characters

Most letter and characters will simply match thereselves. Some special *metacharacters* don't match thereselves.
Instead, they signal that some out-of-ordinary things should be matched, or they affect other portions of the regexx by repeating them
or changing their meaning.

- '[]':
Specify a character class, which is a set of characters that you wish to match. They can be listed individually or a range of characters can be indicated
by giving two characters separated by a '-'.
Metacharacters, except '\', are inactive inside classes.
You can match any characters except those listed in the set by *complementing* the set. This is indicated by including '^' as first character. If it appears
elsewhere in the class, it doesn't have special meaning.

- '\\':
It's used to escape all metacharacters or to signal special sequences.

    - \d: matches any decimal digit = [0-9]
    - \D: matches any non-digit character = [^0-9] 
    - \s: matches any whitespace character = [ \t\n\r\f\v]
    - \S: matches any non-whitespace character = [^ \t\n\r\f\v]
    - \w: matches any alphanumeric character = [a-zA-Z0-9_]
    - \W: matches any non-alphanumeric character = [^a-zA-Z0-9_]


### Repeating things

Regex provides means to specify that a portions of the pattern must be repeated a certain number of times.

- '\*':
Specify that the previous character can be matched zero or more times, instead of exactly once.
Repetition like '\*' are gready: when repeating a regex, the matching engine will try to repeat it as many times as possible. If there is a mismatch later in the string, 
the matching engine will back up and try again with fewer reps.

- '\+':
Specify that the previous character can be matched one or more times.

- '\?':
Specify that the previous character can be matched one or zero times.

- '{m,n}':
Specify that it must be at least m repetitions and at most n repetitions.
You can omit m, then the lower limit will be 0, or n, then higher limit will be infinity.



