---
date: 2025-02-14
tags:
    - Doc
hubs:
    - "[[Communication_Protocol]]"
urls:
    - https://sslinsights.com/ssh-file-transfer-protocol-sftp/
---

# SFTP 

SSH File Transfer Protocol (SFTP) is a secure network protocol that enables file
transfer between computers over an enrypted connection. It's a more secure alternative
to standard FTP protocol.
SFTP uses SSH encryption to protect data during transmission, making it difficult for
unauthorized users to access sensitive information. It provides file access, transfer,
and management functions.

It runs by default on port 22 and requires anthentication through passwords or SSH
keys.

## Key capabilities of STTP
- **Secure remote file access**: brows, view, edit, delete and rename files on the
remote system
- **Uploading and downloading**: transfer files of any size to and from the server
- **Directory management**: create, delete and move folders on the remote filesystem
- **Permissions management**: set read/write/execute permissions on remote files and
directories
- **Resume capability**: pause and resume file transfers in case of interruptions
- **Tunneling support**: tunnel SFTP through SSH connectionns for proxying

## How it works

SFTP layers if file access and transfer functionnality on top of an SSH connection.
It allows to encrypt all communication using SSH tunnel symmetric encryption. It also
benefits from SSH's authentication methods.
Basic SFTP architecture comprises a client and server.

The client is the user interface to access, manage and transfer files on the remote
host. Client software sends file operation commands and data to the server over the
secured SSH tunnel
It tracks user's actions locally and sends equivalent SFTP protocol requests to the
server.

The server listen for incoming SFTP requests from client and performs corresponding
actions ont host's filesystem.
It controls which SFTP commands the client can execute based on configured security
policies. It also logs all SFTP activity.

## Why use SFTP over FTP

- **Encryption**: all SFTP traffic is encrypted using secure ciphers negotiated with
SSH. FTP transmits everything in plain unencrypted text
- **Security**: SFTP uses SSH keys, passwords and others strong auth methods, while FTP
  relies on weak plaintext user credentials
- **Integrity checking**: data integrity in SSH protect against tampering or forgery of
  SFTP transfers
- **Traffic visibility**: SFTP tunnels trhough SSH, avoiding insecure data on
external-facing ports needed for passive SFTP. It also improves firewall traversal
- **Authentication**: SFTP allows verifying both client and server. FTP typically only
authenticates clients
- **Resume capability**: SFTP can resume interrupted transfers. FTP has limited support
  for resuming file transfers
- **Scriptable and automatable**: SFTP works easily with scripts and automation tools.
FTP use requires tricky workarounds
