---
date: 2024-06-25
tags:
    - #Documentation, #Concurrency, #Async_IO
hubs:
    "[[Python.md]]"
urls:
    - https://realpython.com/async-io-python/#a-full-program-asynchronous-requests
    - https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio.html
---

# Asyncio 

Asyncio is a Python library to write concurrent code, but is neither threading or multiprocessing nor built on top of these.
It's a single process, single threaded design using cooperative multitasking. 
Asynchronous routines are able to pause while waiting on their ultimate result and let other routines run in the meatime.
Asynchronous code facilitates concurrent execution through the above mecanism.

## async/await Syntax

Coroutines the heart of async IO routines. A coroutine is a specialized version of a Python generator. 
It's a function that can suspend its execution before reaching return, ant indirectly pass control to another coroutine for some time.

```async def```  introduce a native coroutine or an asynchrous generator.
```await ``` pass function control back to the event loop (i.e. suspend the execution of the surrounding coroutine). 

- A function introduced by ```async def``` is a coroutine. 
- Using ```await``` and/or ```return``` create a coroutine function, which you must await its return when you call it.
- Using ```yield``` in an ```async def``` block is less common. It creates an asynchrous generator which you iterate over
with ```async for```. But you can't use ```yield from```.
- It's a syntax error to ```await``` outside of an ```async def``` coroutine.
- ```await``` must be called on an awaitable object. An awaitable object is either a coroutine or an object
```.__await__()``` method that return an iterator.

## Async IO Design Patterns

### Chained routines
Make corountine await other coroutine to break programs into smaller coroutines.
Ex : 
```
import asyncio
import random
import time

async def part1(n: int) -> str:
    i = random.randint(0, 10)
    print(f"part1({n}) sleeping for {i} seconds.")
    await asyncio.sleep(i)
    result = f"result{n}-1"
    print(f"Returning part1({n}) == {result}.")
    return result

async def part2(n: int, arg: str) -> str:
    i = random.randint(0, 10)
    print(f"part2{n, arg} sleeping for {i} seconds.")
    await asyncio.sleep(i)
    result = f"result{n}-2 derived from {arg}"
    print(f"Returning part2{n, arg} == {result}.")
    return result

async def chain(n: int) -> None:
    start = time.perf_counter()
    p1 = await part1(n)
    p2 = await part2(n, p1)
    end = time.perf_counter() - start
    print(f"-->Chained result{n} => {p2} (took {end:0.2f} seconds).")

async def main(*args):
    await asyncio.gather(*(chain(n) for n in args))

if __name__ == "__main__":
    import sys
    random.seed(444)
    args = [1, 2, 3] if len(sys.argv) == 1 else map(int, sys.argv[1:])
    start = time.perf_counter()
    asyncio.run(main(*args))
    end = time.perf_counter() - start
    print(f"Program finished in {end:0.2f} seconds.")
```

### Using a Queue
An alternative to chained routines is to use independant producers that push item in a queue and independant consumers that pull from the queue.
asyncio provide queue classes adapted to Async IO and that are threadsafe contrary to queue.Queue().

## How coroutines works

Coroutines are repurposed generators that take advantage of the peculiarities of generator methods.
Old generator-based coroutines used ```yield from``` to wait for a coroutine result. Modern Python syntax in ntaive coroutines
simply replace ```yield from``` with ```await``` as the means of waiting on a coroutune result. The ```await``` is analoguous
to ```yield``` and it often helps to thinks it as such.
The use of ```await``` is a signal that marks a break poitn. It lets a coroutines temporarly suspend execution
and permit the program to come back to it later.

## Event loop

asyncio.run() is responsible for getting the asyncio event loop, running tasks and closing the loop.
On their own, coroutines don't do much. They need to be tied to an event loop.
Classic use is to only wrap main() in asyncio.run(), and chained the other coroutines with await.
By default, an async IO event loop run in a single thread on single CPY core, which is generally sufficient.
Event loops are pluggable, so you can write your own event loop implementation.
