---
date: 2025-03-18
tags:
    - Doc 
hubs:
    - "[[Python]]"
urls:
    - https://pyvisa.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html
---

# pyvisa 

PyVISA is a python package that enable to control measurement devices independently of the interface.
The Virtual Instrument Software Architecture (VISA) is a standard for configuring, programming 
and troubleshooting instrumentation systems comprising GPIB, VXI, PXI, Serial, Ethernet and/or
USB interfaces.
PyVISA is both a wrapper for VISA shared libraries but also a front-end for other VISA implementation.


## Backend
In order to work, PyVISA need to have a suitable backend. It includes a backend that wraps the National
Instrument's VISA library but you need to download and install the library yourself.
You can alternatively instal PyVISA-py which is a pure Python implementation of VISA standard.

If no backend is specified, PyVISA uses the IVI backend if any library is installed. If it failed, 
it uses the PyVISA-py backend.
One can also select a desired backend by passing a parameter to the ResourceManager
```>>> pyvisa.ResourceManager("@py")```
Or by setting the PYVISA_LIBRARY environment variable.
It takes either the path to the chosen library, or "@py" for PyVISA-py backend.

## Communicate with an instrument

**Open a connection with an instrument**
```
resource_manager = pyvisa.ResourceManager()
my_instrument = resource_manager.open_resource(<instrument_name>)
```

To get a list of available instrument, use ```resource_manager.list_resources()```

*open_resource* return an instance of a *Resource* subclass corresponding to the targetted instrument.
It is an interface to communicate with the instrument.

You can then communicate with instrument with *write()*, *read()* or *query()* which is a combination
of the two previous one.

**Configure the instrument**
You might need to configure the instrument so that it understands the messages.
For message based instruments, it usually consists of set the *read_termination* and *write_termination*
attribute of the resource.
Those can be set by directly modifying the *Resource* attribute:
```
instrument.read_termination = "\n"
instrument.write_termination = "\n"
```
The correct values should be in the instrument manual. If not, try to iterate through standard values
(\n, \r, \0)

For serial communication, you need to configure the correct baud rate. Default value is 9600.
Check instrument manual for correct value.
```instrument.baud_rate = 57600```

**Making sure the instrument understand the command**
If you encounter errors trying to communicate with an instrument, follow those steps:
- Check the instrument front panel for errors. *If there is errors*, it may mean there is mistake in the command string or the instrument is using a different set of command. *If not*, it means the instrument did not detect the end of the mesage or cannot read it.

- Send a command that would produce a visible/measurable change on the instrument. If there is no error but the expected changement doesn't occurs, it means the instrument did not understand that the command was complete -> issue with the *write_termination* attribute.

- Assuming that the instrument understood the command, the reading part is the issue. Try different standard values for the *read_termination* attribute, but if nothing works use *read_bytes()* method. It reads at most the number of bytes specified. Try reading a byte at a time till encountering a time out. The last read character should be the termination character.

- If it times out on the first read, it means the instrument didn't answer. If the instrument is old, you may be too fast for it. Try waiting a bit before reading, with a *time.sleep()*, or using *query_delay* or pass a *delay* parameter to *query*



## Reading and writing values

Data can be transferred in 2 ways:
- in ASCII form(slow but human readable)
- binary (difficult to debug but fast)

### Reading ASCII values
*Resource* got the *query_ascii_values* to query values in ASCII form. 
It will return a list containing the device values.
You can pass a *container* parameter to define the type of the return values, by a example a numpy.array.
*container* can have any callabe/type that takes an iterable.

Some devices transfer datas not as decimal number but hexadecimals or octals, or as an array of strings.
You can specify a *converter* parameter that can be one of [ Python string formatting codes ](https://docs.python.org/3/library/string.html#formatspec).
Default is 'f'.

Some devices can aslo return values separated in an uncommon way. You can provide *separator* parameter
to define the separator symbol. Default is ','


### Reading binary values

To handle binary values you need to know which datatype is being used. PyVISA use the same naming convention
as the [struct module])(https://docs.python.org/3/library/struct.html#format-characters).
You also need to know the endianness. Default is little endian.
Datatype and endianness can be set using 'datatype' and 'is_big_endian' parameters respectively.
Output container can also be set.
